**C++ Pointer Arithmetic**

- A pointer holds the memory address of an object
  - Ex: An `int*` holds the address of an `int`
- _Pointer arithmetic rule_: arithmetic on pointers produces the same result as arithmetic on the corresponding array indices
- Two pointers are equal if they refer to the same address
- One pointer minus another pointer subtracts their indices in an array
- Pointer arithmetic operates on units of the type of the pointer

**Function args: Pass by value in Python**

```python
def f(arg):
    arg = 0

x = 2
f(2)
print(x)

# output is 2
```

- Input isn't changed because the function parameter is a copy of the value passed to it
- How is this implemented?
  - Values might live in different registers
  - Or one value might live in memory and another in a register
  - Or the two values might live in different memory locations
  - The compiler/interpreter decide

**Pass by reference in Python**

- Python and many other languages pass non-primitive values by reference
- They pass a pointer instead of a copy of data
  - The function being called can mutate the data held by the calling function

No change

```python
def f(arg):
    # reassigns the arg pointer
    arg = ["P"]

x = ['C', 'S', '6', '1']
f(x)
print(x)

# output is ['C', 'S', '6', '1']
```

- With change

```python
def f(arg):
    # mutates the data within the arg pointer
    arg[0] = ["P"]

x = ['C', 'S', '6', '1']
f(x)
print(x)

# output is ['P', 'S', '6', '1']
```

- Passing a pointer avoids copying the value, which has performance benefits
- See lecture notes for how these are implemented

**What's the difference between a Python reference and a C++ pointer**

- Both a Python reference and a C++ pointer contain the address of an object in memory
  - But the C++ abstract machine allows a program to inspect that address and perform pointer arithmetic
    - ex: `fp++` can move a pointer so that the next access is different
  - The Python abstract machine diallows inspection and arithmetic for that address
- Prohibiting address manipulation eliminates lots of potential bugs

**Function params in C++ on x86-64**

- Default approach is pass by value
  - If an arg can fit in a register, compiler will place a copy in a register (ex. an int or a pointer to something)
  - If arg cannot fit in a register (a large struct), the compiler will place the copy in memory
- Compilers often store local variables in the stack (but may keep them in registers too)
- Ex:
  - Local vairable x in the stack region for `main` receives the value `2`
  - `main()` invokes `f(x)` creating a new stack region for `f()`, placing a copy of `x`'s value in `%rax`
  - `f()` assigns to its argument, updating `%rax`. The copy of `x` in main is unchanged.
- See slides for reference example
- C++ has a technical difference between a pointer and a reference. Typing a function as receiving a reference forces the input to be a reference. Pointer requires the caller to explicitly pass a reference.

**Passing complicated values**

- A `vector<int>` contains
  - `arr`: pointer to the array that stores the elements of the vector
  - `size`: number of elements added and removed
  - `capacity`: size of the underlying array
- What happens when `vector<int>` is passed by value?
  - A copy is placed in the receiver's stack frame with a copy of the array in the heap.
  - The receiver will interact with the copy
  - The copy will be destroyed when the receiver returns

**C++ arrays as function parameters and return values**

- Arrays are passed and returned by reference
- It's recommended to return a pointer to the array's first element to make the semantics clearer (instead of leaning by-default on array pass by value semantics)

**My questions**

- Can a value in RAM be directly mutated, or must it be in a register to be mutated?
- Say a large string is in RAM, and we need to print it. Do we need to iteratively read chars into registers to print them, or can we do so directly from RAM?
- How much friction is in the transfer between registers and RAM?

**x86-64 Registers**

- 16 general purpose integer registers
  - `%rbp`: break pointer
  - `%rsp`: stack pointer
  - `%rax`, `%rbx`, etc: used for various purposes
  - `%rip`: instruction pointer (address of next instruction to execute)
  - `%cr3`: page table registers
  - Special float registers
- See lecture notes for more specific explanations
